 perception and disorders of attention. This is the chapters 6, 7, and 8, which I think is too much in the book, so I condensed that to one PowerPoint. In your exams, you will not have to read 6, 7, and 8 from the book. You simply need to follow the PowerPoint. So chapters 6, 7, and 8, the exam questions will be PowerPoint. By the term perception, we talk about, you understand what's perception. Perception is an active mechanism by which we reconstruct the world. Perception is limited by our physical abilities. So, take for example, this is the visible part of the spectrum, meaning from all the light spectrum, this is what we can see. That's it. The rest, we cannot see. So, every time we look at the world, we need to construct a world that is limited to light, because we are unable to see anything beyond that. So, this is reality, and this is us. So, you need to remember that whenever we talk about perception, we don't talk about any objective reality, because the objective reality is the reality determined by physics. And we don't have the capability for that. We are talking about a reality, but we need to construct every time. And constructing reality involves also a number of mistakes. For example, can you see what changes in the two pictures? Anything that changes? Sorry. Yes, but something, there are two pictures, something changes. What changes? What? Yes, because, you know, who cares? It's a tiny boat. Yeah, see that now, now you have learned to look. That's better. Yeah, it cannot fly without it. How about this? All these very cute pictures are an example of what we call change blindness. When we look at a picture, if something changes in the picture, which we do not consider important, we will probably take some time in order to be able to see it, or in most of the cases, we will disregard it. Because every time we see the picture, we have to reconstruct the meaning of the picture. So today, we're going to talk about disorders of the system that we use to either reconstruct the world, that is, perception, or focus in one part of it that will be attention. Common disorders of perception is what we call visual object agnosia. Agnosia means the possibility to know something. So if somebody visually intact perception, meaning your eyes work, your optical nerves work, you don't have any psychological problem, and you don't have any problem with your intellectual function, and you don't have any problem with visual perception in general, and then you cannot recognize an object, we call that visual object agnosia. Agnosia, the inability to know something, comes in a variety of forms. There is a perceptive agnosia. A perceptive means that you cannot recognize something because the visual perception is impaired in the higher level of visual perception, meaning somewhere in the frontal globe. The second is the associative agnosia. Associative agnosia means that you can see something, you recognize it as an object, but you cannot associate that with the part of the mental dictionary that defines what it is. In case of a perceptive agnosia, you don't see that. In case of associative agnosia, you see that, but when I ask you what is it, you will say this is a silver metal cube with a handle. You will not be able to say that, you know, this is a liquid container of anything, because that association is missing. In a perceptive agnosia, there is no problem with your vision or the ways that your eye functions. So the basic acuity, how sharp is your vision, and also your visual fields are retaining the original properties. You have good acuity, meaning you can see with precision, you have discrimination of brightness, you have color vision, you have all the other elementary visual capabilities. However, you cannot distinguish between or recognize different visual shapes. Because of that, also you cannot copy shapes. So if I ask you to copy that, the person with a perceptive agnosia will probably do something like, meaning he will understand that I did three lines, but he will not be able to understand what is the relationship between these three lines. A perceptive agnosia is quite a challenge for the brain, so you need a massive cause for that. So for example, carbon monoxide poisoning. You know carbon monoxide, right? CO. Carbon dioxide is CO2. CO is carbon monoxide. So carbon monoxide for toxic effects can create a perceptive agnosia. There are different subtypes, like dorsal and ventral agnosia. Do you remember? Dorsal and ventral are the nerve directions in anatomy, and visual semi-neglecto, semi means half. In associative agnosia, the perception is relatively preserved, but not the visual object recognition. You recognize the object, but it doesn't have a meaning for you. So for example, again, this you will recognize as an object, but it's a thing made of cotton, but it has a hard part and a soft part, and I don't know what it is. In associative agnosia, you can copy shapes, so you can draw, you can recognize from verbal description or non-visual sense. So if I describe you something, you can recognize what it is, but not if you see it, because the problem is the association between what you see and the meaning, not between what you hear. You can recognize either by feel, so if you touch something, then you are able to tell this is hard. You cannot indicate visual recognition by non-verbal means. So for example, you cannot, for example, copy the object by drawing in order to show that you know what it is, but you can describe it by words. There is a different condition what we call, it's called optic aphasia. Optic aphasia is the ability to name something from description or from touching something, but there is a specific inability to name visually presented objects. Associative agnosia can be general or can be category specific. For example, they can be associative agnosia for faces, you don't recognize faces, or for objects, or for printed work. Generally, it has to do with the occipital and temporal cortex with a ventromedial segment, sometimes left hemisphere of bilateral lesions. Generally, agnosias, in order to appear as the disorder, they need to have a pretty much a big lesion of the brain. So the top is associative agnosia, and the bottom is a perceptive agnosia. So for example, let's say that you have this model to draw in associative agnosia, that will be the drawing of the patient, which is, you know, pretty, it has quite good fidelity to the object, but if you ask the person to say what it is, there will be no description. In associative agnosia, on the other hand, if you have this, then visual recognition will be very poor. Consider that this is a circle and this is a square, so there is no really any correlation between the two. You can see that it guesses that there are two lines here, but it doesn't know how to draw the lines. However, if you ask the person what it is, the verbal element works, so you have circle, square, diamond, three and four. Multagnosia, meaning simultaneous agnosia, is impairment of perception of multi-elements or multi-part visual displays, even visual displays, but have a complex visual information. It may, for example, see a picture, but fail to describe the whole picture. So for example, if you show somebody, if you show somebody this picture, the person will be able to recognize parts of the picture. Here is a bird, here is a tree, or here is a lake, and probably it's snowing, but he won't be able to correlate all that. So for example, he won't be able to say that these people are hunting, okay, and he won't be able to say that these people play on the frozen lake. There can be two types of simultaneous agnosia, dorsal, and ventral simultaneous agnosia. In dorsal, you cannot attend to more than one part of each specific object. So for example, this is an object that has two parts. The one is this and the other is this. So it will be very difficult for somebody with dorsal simultaneous agnosia to compile the two parts. Also, this person may bump into objects, but they are very near each other because every time he will be able to attend one of the objects. So for example, this person may try to cross between here because each time either he will perceive this desk or he will perceive the computer. So one of the two will not exist, so he will fall on one on the other of the two. This can be caused by bilateral lesions in the parietal lobe. Again, we're talking about the serious trauma. The ventral, the ventral simultaneous agnosia, in that case the recognition of shapes is not generally impaired. So for example, somebody can read a word if this person goes letter by letter. It doesn't bump into object, doesn't act by line. It can count, so actually it can see more than one object, meaning it retains the memory of the previous object, but again it doesn't see the whole picture in the scene. It cannot identify more than one object at the time. So imagine this person can say that this is one chair and one chair, therefore two chairs, but it cannot say these are two chairs. Okay, so you can add because it has some memory of the previous chair being seen, but it cannot see two chairs and say these are two. You say this is one, this is one, therefore these are two. Or this is one, this is one, this is one, so three. Again, these are lesions in the inferior temporal occipital cortex. These are again drawings. For example, this is called what we call hemineglect or semi-neglect where we pretty much neglect half of the visual field. So presented with that, the person will see only this part of the visual field and will try to make sense. So the person will not be able to conceive it as a whole face or he will see the other part of the field. In cases of simultaneously, this person will not be able to recognize the whole object. So this person will try to draw specific parts without being able to tell that all this is an object. Another deficit that was found by Wharton-Taylor in 1973 is the perceptual categorization deficit. Subjects have trouble matching 3D objects across differences in viewing conditions, so changes of lightning and perspective. You understand what is matching 3D objects? This is a 3D object. If you see it like that, it's a control. Okay, now it's still a control for you, right? The person with that problem, that's a control. Who knows what is that? Okay, so when there are differences in light, shade, or orientation, which change the 3D shape, the object is no more recognizable. Pretty much the person cannot say that this thing and this thing are the same thing. Because you need a considerable change in light and perspective. Usually these people do not have many problems in real life. Sometimes if the change is very small in light, so from here to here, then they don't have a problem. If the object becomes very dark, then maybe they will have a problem. Usually the problem is in the right inferior part alone, but we don't have a good localization about where this deficit comes from. These are problems with this deficit. It's an effort to copy that. You see when we change the shape, it's very difficult for the person to reorient the shape correctly. Dr. Paclossian has been made famous by a book of Oliver Sacks, The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. I think I showed this book before. Oliver Sacks was a neurologist, a very good one. He has a good writing style. One of his most famous cases is The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. How The Man Mistook His Wife for a Hat. The man went with his wife. They went to see a doctor because he said he had some memory problems. In the doctor's lobby, there was a sofa. The sofa has three seats. The man sits in the middle, his wife sits here, and the man takes off his hat and leaves it at the other seat of the sofa that is empty. Here there is a small table that has books and magazines. So the doctor calls the man inside. The man goes to the doctor's office. While the man is in the doctor's office, his wife wants to, she's bored and she wants to check a magazine. So the wife goes here. She sits there and puts the hat there. When he finishes with the doctor, he comes out. He goes straight here and tries to work his wife. The guy actually, his problem was that he was very clever because he couldn't recognize faces, but he wanted to hide it. How did he hide that he cannot recognize things? He was remembering everything by where he put it. So for example, if always I put my container here, I don't need to know it's my container. I just need to know it's here. Whatever is here, it's my container. Now if one of you replaces my container with that, then I will think that this is my container. And until I touch it, I will think that this is my container, just because it's in the same place. That's exactly what happened with the wife. He remembered very well where he put his hat. He put his hat next to the table. But when he came out of the doctor's office, the hat was not there anymore. So in his mind, whatever is next to the table is my hat. Next to the table was his wife. All this would never have happened if he had accepted that there is a problem. But he was a clever guy and he was trying to hide it for as long as he could. For agnosia, usually we people in many cases are not aware of the deficit. They are aware of the deficit. It's called also face blindness. They in order to recognize somebody, they rely on non-facial cues like voice or the way people walk or the clothing. They recognize most of the times that they are reaching at the face and they can discriminate some qualities like gender, race, age, emotional expression, but not recognize the face. This appears from damage in the superior temporal circles of the brain. It's strongly connected to the amygdala. An injury also can cause a separate deficit in the ability to understand the emotions of other people based on looking at them. It can be also secondary to an infarct meaning a mass of blood which has solidified in the temporal cortex. It can be associated with Alzheimer's, but with much else. Then most strongly it's associated with the part of the brain which is called fusiform gyrus and the fusiform face area. This is the fusiform gyrus in the brain and what we call the fusiform face area. It seems to be an area of the brain which is particularly dedicated in recognizing faces. You understand why we need to recognize faces. You understand why it's important for the brain to recognize faces. It's a matter of safety. If we know somebody, that's safe. If we don't know, it can be unsafe. If the face is hungry, that can mean danger. If the face is happy, we feel safe. Face recognition, it's a very basic survival task. This area is the fusiform gyrus and all this area is used for face recognition. Another common although enough misunderstood disorder of perception is what we call central acromatopsia. Acromatopsia means the inability to correctly perceive color. People with acromatopsia can perceive both those difference defined in with different colors for example with the Ishikara test. Okay all these are types of Ishikara test. People with acromatopsia will not be able to read 74 here or 12 or 96 although it's quite rare for somebody to have full 100 percent acromatopsia. Usually acromatopsia means but the task becomes more difficult not impossible. Pure form of acromatopsia as I said is very rare. I think it's very rare to be totally unable to see any form of color. It requires actually quite an extensive damage lesions in both hemispheres in the occipital lobe. For most people it's a defect of color perception which caused by an acquired cerebral lesion. The result is reduced hue discrimination meaning you can understand that something is red but you cannot easily understand dark red from bright pink for example. A deficient color constancy meaning you are not able to understand that even under changing light a color remains the same and has a problem of ordering colors from darker to lighter in a test. In many cases colors can be either all gray or washed out or dirty or faded. Also in some cases Oliver Sachs again describes problems of patients with acromatopsia in imagining colors. Also is known as color agnosia. Ballin syndrome is a type of similar agnosia which is independent on object side of visual periphery. There is a spatial disorientation meaning inability to orient or reach for objects. It's also called called optic ataxia. It has problem with ocular motor disturbances meaning inability to coordinate movements with your eyes or to smoothly pursue a moving object. Also it's inability to move eyes to a new position. So ballin syndrome is a combination of optic ataxia meaning the disorientation and inability to react and optic apraxia which is inability to move the eyes to new positions. A group of very rare syndromes but very impressive in a neurological sense is the misidentification syndromes. Misidentification syndromes is when you mistake someone for somebody else. The most common syndrome is the Capgras syndrome. Capgras because of the guy who found him. In the Capgras syndrome you believe that your family is replaced by people who pretend that they are your family. So your father is not your real father it's some actor or imposter who pretends that he is your father and your mother is not your real mother. So it's an inability to be sure but the faces you see in your relatives are real faces. This was a capgras syndrome it's extremely rare but it has been recorded more than one time. The second is the freckle syndrome. The freckle again from the name of the guy who found it it's kind of the opposite of capgras. In the freckle syndrome what happens is that you believe that a member of your family has replaced a stranger. For example you go to 7-eleven and you think that your sister is the person that says you think in the 7-eleven and she pretends she works in the 7-eleven or you believe that the school bus driver is really your uncle only he pretends to be the school bus driver. Another misidentification syndrome is that of intermetamorphosis. Intermetamorphosis means that both two people that you both know they have exchanged identities. Your uncle has become your father and your father has become your uncle. And even more rare is the delusion of subjective doubles meaning the patient himself believes that he has been replaced by somebody else. All these syndromes are not psychiatric syndromes in the sense that these people do not suffer from psychosis or schizophrenia but they are syndromes that have to do with damages in the ability to perceive and identify others. So capgras syndrome or capgras delusion was named after the french psychiatrist george capgras. He wrote a paper about a woman that was convinced that doubles or actors or imposters have replaced people she knew. It has been proposed that face recognition when you will recognize somebody's face has both conscious parts and unconscious parts so the idea that is that people can recognize faces but they cannot associate the faces with the people they know so they have to believe that these faces are strangers. It has to come from a visual processing defect and also in addition to other problems. Notice it's but it's not just cognitive vaccines of remia it's cognitive but also it's based on visual processing. Some people with prosopagnosia show the opposite they do not have recognition but they have appropriate emotion so if for example they see mother they don't recognize after mother but they feel safe and happy to see that mother. Fregoli was named by an italian actor and exchange artist. Fregoli they believe that different people are a single person but changes many disguises and many forms. Again it's not to be a problem with normal face. Another phenomenon which is between psychiatry and cognition is what we call reduplicative paramecia. In that case it's a misidentification not of people it's a misidentification of places so it's a delusion belief but a specific place can exist in two different places at once. For example it's the belief that there is a university here but the same building exists also in Taitung. Okay so this we call reduplicative paramecia because it redoubles a place. Originally thought to be psychological the current thing is that it involves disorders of visual spatial processing and memory like temporal cortex and hippocampus. This is the case of reduplicative paramecia. The patient fell in his house and suffered a blow to the head. The impact has caused a fractured skull and some frontal lobe damage to both sides although more damage to the right because there was because of the heat there was hematomas blood clots forming inside the brain which were pushing the nerves. So he went to a hospital in the neurobehavioral center. His orientation in time was correct he knew what date was what time it was. He could give details of the accident because they told him what happened to him. He could remember the doctor's names and could learn new information and retain the new information. However, he had a problem with orientation about the place. While he quickly learned and remembered that he was at the Jamaica Plain Veterans Hospital also known as Boston Veterans Administration Hospital. He insisted that the hospital was in Massachusetts in his hometown. Under close questioning he acknowledged that Jamaica Plain was part of Boston and admitted it would be strange for there to be two Jamaica Plain hospitals. Nonetheless, he insisted that he was hospitalized in a plane of the in a branch of the hospital that is in his hometown. So this is a case of 1976 where the person believes that the hospital exists at the same time in two different places. Have a break.